Skip to main content

Aloha talk, not much action ... Bradley Cooper, left, and Rachel McAdams.
Photograph: Neal Preston/AP

Cameron Crowe
 has been making movies about lost man-puppies on the comeback trail for so long now that it’s almost become a kind of mantra. His latest movie, Aloha
 is so hell-bent on self-consolation it feels like whistling in the dark. You want to pet it and tell it not to worry: everything will be OK.
Bradley Cooper
There’s a level of emotional sophistication directors sometimes reach – 
James L Brooks
 reached it, and 
Jonathan Demme
 reached it, and now Crowe – which is actually anathema to the daily spit and grind of drama. Everyone is so sparky, empathic, playful and forgiving in this movie you almost feeling like drawing a curtain and leaving them to it. The emotional payoffs precede the setups. Cooper and Stone anticipate and echo each other’s thoughts and feelings so nimbly they’re barely in occupancy of their own skins. Rachel McAdams bats her eyes at Cooper in a series of moony close-ups, before revealing her hurt to him, but why not equip her character with a few defences or barbs? Why put the forgiveness ahead of the hurt? 
Because Crowe is afraid of not getting to his fix of inspiration fast enough, is why. Everyone remembers the final scene of 
Jerry Maguire
 in which Tom Cruise gives that long speech to win back Renee Zellweger, only to be cut off by “You had me at hello” – a joke made memorable in part because it takes a poke at Crowe’s own verbal superfluity. Well, his movies are now drunk on that feeling – the hey-presto magic of someone digging themselves out of a corner with a deep chug of self-belief – all the time. Inspiration has become Cameron Crowe’s crack. His films are all-you-can-eat pixie-dust buffet from which all unnecessary excitement has been expunged. The plot of Aloha
is held at bay for so long that eventually it arrives in a pile-up of last-minute twists, and – strangely and belatedly – the film’s two funniest scenes.
First, we get a silent 
mano e mano
 scene between Krasinksi and Cooper in which their body language is spelled out in subtitles. And then a fantastic explosion of rage from Alec Baldwin as a foul-tempered general who seems to have been saving up insults from The Departed. As he guts Cooper for being a “three-day beard boy” you realise what this film might have been with a grizzled old dog like Baldwin at the helm. Then we might have had a comeback worth talking about. 
More reviews 
Topics

Aloha


Bradley Cooper


Bill Murray


Cameron Crowe


Emma Stone

Share on Facebook
Share on Twitter
Share via Email
Share on LinkedIn
Share on Google+
Share on WhatsApp
