guardian - 55526f89a6b867b0949cf9f7
----------------------------------------------

Why has the Guardian launched a new direction for its climate campaign?
In December, leaders and negotiators from more than 190 countries meet in Paris to negotiate a crucial new deal on climate change. There has arguably never been a more important time for the media to take a stand on the issue. As the Paris summit approaches, Keep it in the ground, the Guardian’s climate campaign that launched in March, is making a shift in direction to tap into a rare commodity in the climate debate - hope. In particular, we are aiming to give a fresh focus on the solar revolution already underway and transforming the global energy system. We want to show that the transition to a world run on clean energy is possible and indeed already happening outside the doors of the UN. We also want to give a platform to the people impacted by the decisions being made in Paris and to showcase the energy and creative actions that our readers can get involved in. Why are you focusing on hope? Aren’t you underestimating the challenge of climate change a bit?
The supporters of Keep it in the ground have been its backbone so when it came to deciding where to turn next, we looked at what they had told us. One message came through loud and clear: people want hope.
There’s no doubting that the challenges posed by climate change are monumental, but we believe that the potential of clean energy and the stories of people finding new ways to fight climate change are currently underreported. As the first phase of Keep it in the ground focused on this challenge and the threat of the fossil fuel industry, we now want to make a point of surfacing a positive narrative. We hope it will show that many of the tools needed for the transition to a world run on clean energy are already available, although they may require significantly quicker investment. If the campaign first asked about divestment, it’s now time to turn the tables and ask: what about investment? What do we need to do and what is already happening to create a better world?
Why are you focusing on solar so much? What about other renewables?
Tackling climate change will take a variety of approaches and we plan to tell many different solutions stories. But we want to showcase in particular the potential of the solar revolution that is currently underway. Since 2009, the price of solar panels has dropped by around 70%, meaning that in some developing countries, where many inspiring projects are in progress, it is as cheap or cheaper than fossil fuels. Hillary Clinton has made it a significant part of bid to be the next president, with the industry now the fastest growing source of power in the US and year-on-year residential rooftop installations in the country increasing by 70%. How can I get involved?
If you want to make sure you don’t miss any news from Keep it in the ground, sign up here to receive updates in your inbox. If you already signed up as part of our original campaign, don’t worry – you don’t need to again. We’ll send you the best stories as well as actions you can get involved in.
on our weekly blog. Or if you’ve got an idea or a question, you can get in touch with the team by emailing Watch this space! Didn’t the Guardian already launch its climate change campaign?
Yes. Keep it in the ground originally launched in March with the aim of supercharging the debate on climate change and the fossil fuel industry in particular. The campaign, in partnership with the environmental NGO , threw its weight behind the fossil fuel divestment movement, growing rapidly around the world. It shone the spotlight on the investments of the world’s biggest charitable foundations and funders of medical research – the Bill and Melinda Gates’ Foundation and the Wellcome Trust – asking them to move the money out of the oil, coal and gas companies polluting the planet. At the same time, we invested in journalism to tell the story of the fossil fuel industry, including investigations into corporations and a series of pieces exposing the gigantic fossil fuel reserves around the world. Readers also became heavily involved in the project, writing heartfelt letters to executives at the Wellcome Trust, recording short films for Bill Gates and working with us to push their own pensions funds to divest their savings. Why the Guardian is putting the threat to Earth front and centreBill Gates: “will you lead the fight against climate change?”“Do no harm”: medical professionals urge Wellcome Trust to end fossil fuel investmentsCarbon bombs: gigantic coal, oil and gas projects around the worldDoes this mean you’re abandoning fossil fuel divestment and your partnership with 350.org? I still want to be part of the campaign!
We aren’t giving up on the movement at all – it’s the fastest growing divestment campaign of all time and we still want to be a part of it. We will continue to give a voice to the global movement and to push the Wellcome Trust and Gates’ Foundation to divest. Our original decision to support divestment was inspired by 350.org and the work of campaigners around the world, so we will continue to work with them to support the movement. What did you achieve last time?
More than 226,000 people from 170 countries have now joined the Keep it in the ground campaign, which was backed by the then UK energy secretary Ed Davey, actor Tilda Swinton, author Helen Macdonald, former chief scientist Lord May and Prince Charles amongst others - as well as the UNWithin a few weeks of launching, the Guardian Media Group, which owns the Guardian, committed to divest its £800m fund from fossil fuels, becoming the largest fund in the world to do so, at the time. Over the duration of the campaign, many other institutions have made the same decision.  showed that the worth of institutions divesting so far is $2.6tn, a 50-fold increase in the past year. Notable commitments since March have come from the largest pensions funds in the US, the largest sovereign wealth fund in the world and major universities including California, Oxford and Syracuse. Of course, we don’t know what role the campaign played in these decisions, but it is worth noting that since launching Bill Gates has committed to invest $2bn (£1.3bn) in breakthrough renewable energy projects, while the Wellcome Trust has launched a new £75m programme to investigate the links between the environment and health. We hope that the campaign has shifted the focus of the climate change debate on to health, economics and politics, with increasing coverage of divestment in many other media outlets. In May, the Climate Publishers’ Network was launched, a partnership and agreement between leading news organisations to share climate change content in the approach to Paris. Meet the #KeepitintheGround supportersGlobal news organisations agree to share climate change contentWhat did the Guardian’s original campaign ask for?
We call on the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and the Wellcome Trust to remove their investments from the top 200 fossil fuel companies and any commingled funds that include fossil fuel public equities and corporate bonds within five years. We also ask them to immediately freeze any new investments in these companies. Who are the Wellcome Trust and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation? Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and the Wellcome Trust are respectively the largest and second-largest charitable foundations in the world. The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation have provided billions in funding for global development, health and education. Their first project, which connected 99% of US libraries to the internet is now making similar progress in Africa, South America and Eastern Europe. They have tackled the devastating effects of malaria and polio and funded the experimental vaccines working to wipe them out. The Wellcome Trust exists to fund medical research. They have led the fight against Ebola, pouring millions into experimental vaccines and rapid-response humanitarian research. They are also a major funder of research into potential treatments for cancer and new therapies that could restore the sight of millionsWhy is the Guardian targeting them with this campaign?
Both organisations rate climate change as a serious threat. In its Strategic Plan 2010-20, the Wellcome Trust states that: “Global health is under serious threat from the interlinked issues of access to nutrition, food security and climate change.” It lists “Connecting environment, nutrition and health” as one of its five challenges.
The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation states that: “The foundation believes that climate change is a major issue facing all of us, particularly poor people in developing countries... many of our global health and development grants directly address problems that climate change creates or exacerbates.” It also says that its investments are not simply there to make money: “when instructing the investment managers, Bill and Melinda also consider other issues beyond corporate profits, including the values that drive the foundation’s work. They have defined areas in which the endowment will not invest, such as companies whose profit model is centrally tied to corporate activity that they find egregious. This is why the endowment does not invest in tobacco stocks.” Yet between them, these two foundations also have over $70bn (£47bn) worth of endowments, millions of which is funding exploration for new fossil fuel reserves. In 2013 the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation had invested at least $1bn of this in 35 of the top 200 carbon reserve companies, while in 2014 the Wellcome Trust had £564m invested in Shell, BP, Schlumberger, Rio Tinto and BHP Billiton alone. These investments are undoing much of the untold good work these organisations do. What is divestment?
Divestment is the opposite of investment – it is the removal of your investment capital from stocks, bonds or funds. The global movement for fossil fuel divestment (sometimes also called disinvestment) is asking institutions to move their money out of oil, coal and gas companies for both moral and financial reasons. These institutions include universities, religious institutions, pension funds, local authorities and charitable foundationsEvidence shows that proven fossil fuel reserves are more than three times higher than we can afford to burn in order to stay below the generally agreed threshold for dangerous climate change. Fossil fuel companies are currently banking on extracting these reserves and selling them – and are actively prospecting for more. By supporting these companies, investors not only continue to fund unsustainable business models that are bound to make climate change worse, but they also risk their financial assets becoming worthless if international agreements on climate change are met. These investments are creating a “carbon bubble” worth trillions of dollars based on assets that could prove to be unusable. The Bank of England is conducting an investigation into whether these over-valued assets could plunge the world into another economic crisis. Although the impact of divestment on share prices may be relatively small, the reputational damage can have serious financial consequences.
Since 2010, the movement for fossil fuel divestment, started by , has persuaded 180 institutions, worth $50bn (£33bn) to divest, with Stanford University in the US, Glasgow University in the UK and the Rockefeller Brothers Fund among the most notable.
It is the fastest growing divestment campaign in history and could cause significant damage to coal, gas and oil companies according to a study by Oxford University. Previous divestment campaigns have targeted the tobacco and gambling industries and companies funding the violence in Darfur. Divestment is perhaps most well known for its role in the fight against apartheid in South Africa.
Bill McKibben on the growth of the divestment movementHas anyone divested from fossil fuels already?
200 institutionsworth over $50bn (£33bn), have committed to divest from fossil fuels, including universities, local authorities, faith organisations and pension funds. A coalition of philanthropic foundations, including the heirs to the Rockefeller oil fortune, started to pull out their investments last year, while cities divesting include San Francisco, Seattle and Oslo. The world’s largest sovereign wealth fund, Norway’s Government Pension Fund Global (GPFG), has divested from coal. The World Council of Churches and the Quaker movement in Britain have made commitments not to invest in fossil fuels, but campaigns targeting the Church of England and the Vatican are ongoing.
In October 2014, Glasgow university became the first in Europe to make the commitment, with the University of Bedfordshire following close behind. In the US, the New School in New York, Syracuse and and California are divesting while Stanford University has committed to remove its assets from coal companies.
What is the Guardian itself doing?
Guardian Media Group (GMG) has committed to selling all the fossil fuel assets in its investment fund of over £800m, making it the largest yet known to pull out of coal, oil and gas companies. Announcing the move, GMG’s chair Neil Berkett wrote: “We are not doing this because it makes good headlines. We are doing it because it makes good business sense. As part of our review, conducted in partnership with investment advisers Cambridge Associates, it became clear that GMG can prudently work towards allocating more funds to socially responsible investments without jeopardising our overall returns.”Isn’t it hypocritical for the Guardian to take advertising from fossil fuel companies?
The Guardian believes that editorial independence is essential. We have a strict policy of not allowing advertisers to influence editorial content. Furthermore, one can argue that historically, it was funding from advertising that enabled editorial independence. The noted historian of British newspapers, Francis Williams, described in his 1958 book, Dangerous Estate, how the daily press “would never have come into existence as a force in public and social life if it had not been for the need of men of commerce to advertise. Only through the growth of advertising did the press achieve independence.” Before advertising, newspapers were often funded directly by political parties with inevitable consequences.
Alan Rusbridger, the Guardian’s former editor-in-chief summed up the paper’s position at a panel event in 2009: “I think it is very dangerous for the editorial department to start interfering with advertising and I certainly wouldn’t welcome it the other way around.”What is the threat posed by climate change?
“No challenge poses a greater threat to future generations than climate change,” said Barack Obama in January 2015.
2014 was the hottest year on record97% of scientific papers on climate change agree that the warming that has led to this peak was caused in large part by human activity. No country will remain unaffected by climate change, but poorer areas of the globe are likely to be affected the most. Extreme weather events, such as heatwaves and intense storms are on the rise and will become normal. As sea levels rise, coastal cities and communities will will be more susceptible to flooding. Diseases affected by temperature, such as malaria, will spread to new regions. Severe droughts will lead to food and water shortages – by as much as 50% by the end of the century, according to the World Bank. This could create billions of climate refugees, displaced by conflict triggered by these shortages. For example, a study by Columbia University argues that climate change was a key driver of the conflict in Syria. The United Nations and climate negotiators representing governments around the world agree that in order to avoid dangerous climate change, the temperature of the planet must not rise more than 2C above pre-industrial levels. According to the World Bank, without immediate concerted action, we are currently on track to reach this within two or three decades and to reach a 4C rise by the end of the century. This, according to Prof Kevin Anderson of the Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research, is “incompatible with any reasonable characterization of an organized, equitable and civilized global community”.
For more information see the Guardian’s Ultimate Climate Change FAQWhy should we keep some fossil fuels in the ground?
The risk posed by today’s fossil fuel industry to the climate comes down to simple arithmetic using just three numbers, or “doing the math’, as campaigner Bill McKibben puts it.
The first number is 2C, the amount of global warming the world’s governments have set as a limit. Beyond 2C, the world’s scientists project “severe, widespread, and irreversible impacts” on people. The 2C number began life in 1995 as a round number that was useful in political negotiations. But since then scientists have warned that even 2C of warming will bring damaging impacts.
The second number is 565bn tonnes (gigatons or GT) of carbon dioxide, which scientists estimate is the maximum amount that can be produced by future fossil fuel burning if we are to have an 80% chance of keeping global warming under 2C. If you use a lower chance, say 50% or 66%, the amount of allowable CO2 gets a bit bigger. But whatever the amount, they are all dwarfed by the third number. This is the total CO2 that would be released if today’s proven reserves of coal, oil and gas are burned: 2,795 GT. That is the fossil fuel identified and ready to extract.
So here’s the arithmetic. To stay under 2C, only 565 GT of CO2 can be emitted, but there is already 2,795 GT - fives times more - ready to burn.
This simple analysis has global implications. If climate change is to be tamed, most existing fossil fuel reserves must be kept in the groundWhat is the carbon bubble?
The “carbon bubble” is a term that has been used by regulators, financial companies and campaigners to describe the over valuation of stocks in coal, gas and oil reserves owned by fossil fuel companies around the world. If governments pursue international targets on carbon emissions in order to curb climate change, then between two-thirds and four-fifths of these reserves cannot be used, rendering them worthless. As fossil fuel companies are among the richest in the world these “stranded assets” have the potential to trigger a new global economic crisis if investors pull out in quick succession. The carbon bubble could be inflating stocks worth trillions of dollars, according to a study published in 2013 by think-tank Carbon Tracker and economist Lord Nicholas Stern who authored a landmark 2006 report commissioned by Gordon Brown, then UK chancellor of the exchequer, into the economic consequences of climate change. Shell has refuted the concept, predicting in a letter to its shareholders that fossil fuels would account for between 40% and 50% of the energy supply in 2050 and beyond. The Bank of England is currently conducting an investigation into the potential of a “carbon bubble” to damage the economy.
What is the carbon budget?
The carbon budget is the amount of greenhouse gas that can still be released into the atmosphere without exceeding dangerous levels of climate change - the 2C target agreed by international governments. In 2013, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) put a figure on the carbon budget for the first time, announcing that the world burns through about 50bn tonnes of greenhouse gases every year. It is also very likely that more than 20% of emitted CO2 will remain in the atmosphere longer than 1,000 years after manmade emissions have stopped. This means that if we continue to emit at current levels, we will “spend” the carbon budget within 15 to 25 years. Given that we have already used two-thirds of the budget, the IPCC have urged governments to act quickly, using the carbon budget as the basis for international negotiations. You don’t seriously think you’re going to bankrupt the oil, coal and gas companies do you?
No. Although the impact of divestment on share prices may be relatively small, the reputational damage can have serious financial consequences.
“Stigmatisation poses a far-reaching threat to fossil fuel companies – any direct impacts of divestment pale in comparison.” said Ben Caldecott, the author of a report on fossil fuel divestment published by the University of Oxford in October 2013. It said: “stigmatisation poses the most far-reaching threat to fossil fuel companies and the vast energy value chain. In every case we reviewed, divestment campaigns were successful in lobbying for restrictive legislation.”Won’t divestment from fossil fuels result in the end of modern civilisation?
It is true that most of today’s energy, and many useful things such as plastics and fertilisers, come from fossil fuels. But the divestment campaign is not arguing for an end of all fossil fuel use starting tomorrow, with everyone heading back to caves to light a campfire. Instead it is arguing that the burning of fossil fuels at increasing rates is driving global warming, which is the actual threat to modern civilisation. Despite already having at least three times more proven reserves than the world’s governments agree can be safely burned, fossil fuel companies are spending huge sums exploring for more. Looked at in that way, pulling investments from companies committed to throwing more fuel on the climate change fire makes sense.
Isn’t divestment hypocritical because we all use fossil fuels?
Again, no-one is arguing for an overnight end to all fossil fuel use. Instead, the 350.org group which is leading the divestment campaign calls for investors to commit to selling off their coal, oil and gas investments over five years. Fossil fuel burning will continue after that too, but the point is to reverse today’s upward trend of ever more carbon emissions into a downward trend of ever less carbon emissions. Furthermore, some of those backing a “divest-invest” strategy move money into the clean energy and energy efficiency sectors which have already begun driving the transition to a low-carbon world.
Isn’t this just gesture politics rather than meaningful action?
The dumping of a few fossil few stocks makes no immediate difference at all to the amount of carbon dioxide entering the atmosphere. But this entirely misses the point of divestment, which aims to remove the legitimacy of a fossil fuel industry whose current business model will lead to “severe, widespread and irreversible” impacts on people. Divestment works by stigmatising, as pointed out in a report from Oxford University: “The outcome of the stigmatisation process poses the most far-reaching threat to fossil fuel companies. Any direct impacts pale in comparison.”The “gesture politics” criticism also ignores the political power of the fossil fuel industry, which spent over $400m on lobbying and political donations in 2012 in the US alone. Undercutting that lobbying makes it easier for politicians to take action and the Oxford study showed that previous divestment campaigns – against apartheid South Africa, tobacco and Darfur – were all followed by restrictive new laws.
Those comparisons also highlight the moral dimension at the heart of the divestment campaign. Another dimension is warning investors that their fossil fuel assets may lose their value if climate change is tackled. Lastly, backing divestment does not mean giving up putting direct pressure on politicians to act or any other climate change campaign.
divestment mythsWon’t the fossil fuel stocks be bought cheaply by others who care less about climate change?
They may do but the stocks being divested are too small to flood the market and cut share prices, so they won’t be going cheap. Those who do purchase these stocks are prioritising short-term financial gain over long-term investment. As the president of the World Bank has said, an investment portfolio that recognises the financial risk of climate change is “acting in simple self-interest”. More to the point, the strategy of the divestment movement is not to bankrupt the fossil fuel industry by the removal of shares but to cause reputational damage.
Is my own money invested in fossil fuels?
Highly likely. provide information on taking your own money out of fossil fuels. Most of the high street banks, including HSBC, Lloyds, Barclays, Royal Bank of Scotland and Santander, have millions invested in fossil fuel companies. Most investment funds, including pension funds are heavily invested in fossil fuels and do not offer savers a fossil free option.  are currently running a campaign asking investment managers, pension providers and savings platforms to offer consumers a way to divest their own savings. They can support you to approach your own pension provider, while Move your Money are campaigning for banks to divest.
Where can I find more information about the divestment movement?
The global fossil fuel divestment campaign is a project started by , which is coordinating an international network of climate campaigns in 188 countries. You can find more information on their Fossil Free website about divestment, about campaigns in your local area or about starting your own campaign. Can I donate to the campaign?
The Guardian is not seeking donations for its Keep it in the Ground campaign but if you want to donate to  you can do so . If you are based outside the UK, you can donate What have people said about fossil fuel divestment?
Mark Carney, governor of the Bank of EnglandThe vast majority of reserves are unburnable, Valerie Rockefeller Wayne, great-granddaughter of John D Rockefeller Sr, founder of Standard OilIf you look back, when John D Rockefeller Sr got into the business, we got our oil from whales. His big breakthrough was to get oil out of the ground. The breakthrough now is going to be in clean energy. You should be there at the forefront. Those are the investors who are going to make the most money .
Jim Yong Kim, World Bank president, at Davos 2014Rethink what fiduciary responsibility means in this changing world. It’s simple self-interest. Every company, investor, and bank that screens new and existing investments for climate risk is simply being pragmatic. Archbishop Desmond TutuPeople of conscience need to break their ties with corporations financing the injustice of climate change. We can encourage more of our universities and municipalities and cultural institutions to cut their ties to the fossil fuel industry. Christiana Figures, UN climate chiefThe pensions, life insurances and nest eggs of billions of ordinary people depend on the long-term security and stability of institutional investment funds… Climate change increasingly poses one of the biggest long-term threats to those investments and the wealth of the global economy.
Barack ObamaScience is science, and there is no doubt that if we burned all the fossil fuel that’s in the ground right now that the planet’s going to get too hot and the consequences could be dire… We’re not going to be able to burn it all.
Hank Paulson, former Treasury secretary for George Bush’s administration and former CEO Goldman SachsClimate change is the challenge of our time. Each of us must recognise that the risks are personal. We’ve seen and felt the costs of underestimating the financial bubble. Let’s not ignore the climate bubble.
